---
slug: '001_20210722'
title: Day One
description: Hello, world.
date: '2021-07-22'
---

## Intro

Hello, I'm Dorian. Welcome to my blog! I am a licensed pharmacist and I love to code in my free time. I'm hoping to make the transition to full-time tech
by coding as much as a I can and building a noteworthy portfolio that will land me my first gig.

## Purpose

This blog will serve as a diary of sorts, a chronicling of my journey into tech. Hopefully it can also serve as a helpful resource to other people also
looking to transition to tech. As I flail about aimlessly, I hope to document my projects, my successes, my failures, and most importantly, what I've learned
from them all.

## About Me

I'm a pharmacist by training, earning my PharmD from the [University of Maryland School of Pharmacy](https://www.pharmacy.umaryland.edu/) in Baltimore, MD and, prior to that, my B.A in African American Studies from the [University of Maryland](https://umd.edu/) in College Park, MD.

I started as a CompSci major but wasn't the best student. Long story short, here I am several years later trying to get back to the career that I always wanted but never thought I could have.

## The Plan

I've honestly been all over the place. I struggle with structure and self-discipline. That's partly why I became a pharmacist; pharmacy school does all the work for you, the path is clear, the objectives are clear. And while there's some variability (e.g. what field of practice you ultimately choose) the overall path is the same: graduate from a program, get licensed, apply for jobs. Whereas with self-taught web-development the path can vary greatly. Not only are there a variety of fields to get into (frontend, backend, fullstack, design, UI/UX etc) there's also a plethora of technologies to choose from.

So the plan for now is two-fold. I'm enrolled in the free online bootcamp by [Reskill Americans](https://www.reskillamericans.org/) and I've recently discovered [The Odin Project](https://www.theodinproject.com/home) so now I'm dipping my toes into that as well beginning with foundations. In the Reskill Americans bootcamp I'm currently in the project phase where, working along with a team of others, I'm helping to develop the backend of a project that actually resembles The Odin Project, a curriculum with guidance and resources on how to improve applicable skills for a given subject area.

And that's how all over the place I am. On one hand I'm building models and endpoints with mongoose and Express JS, and on the other, I'm about to create a Google hompage replica with HTML and CSS. Even though I've learned a workable amount of HTML, CSS, Javascript, React, NodeJS, and Express, I feel like I always have gaps in knowledge, like a lack of _deep_ understanding, so I don't mind going over material again.
