---
slug: '002_20211121'
title: I'll Get Back to You ...
description: How promises work
date: '2021-11-21'
---

## Intro

It alludes me at the moment, but somehow, in the middle of building a [weather app](https://github.com/buddafucofibas/weatherapp) for my portfolio site, I realized that my grasp on javascript Promises was tenuous at best. I took a deep dive into chapter 13 of [David Flanagan's JavaScript The Definitive Guide](https://www.barnesandnoble.com/w/javascript-david-flanagan/1135637239?ean=9781491952023) and here's what I came away with.

## Asynchronous Programming

To understand why Promises exist, we must understand the difference between _sychronous_ and _asynchronous_ code. Synchrounous code is executed sequentially, line by line, without pause. Asynchronous code on the other hand must pause and wait for something to happen, e.g. data retrieval.

### Callback Functions

The traditional way of handling this, before Promises were introduced in ES6, was with _callback functions_. Callback functions are functions that are passed as arguments to other functions to be invoked when the function into which they are passed complete some task or a condition is met. Client-side javascript (javascript in the browser) uses callback functions for handling events.

```js
let signIn = document.querySelector('#main-nav button')
signIn.addEventListener('click', () => {
  // code to be executed when user clicks signIn button
})
```

The primary drawback with callback functions is something called callback hell. This is where callback functions are nested within one another creating a what appears to be a pyramid. This code is difficult to read, maintain, and overall not to pretty.

```js
getSomeData('...url', (data1, err1) => {
    if(err1) throw err1
    doStuffToData(data1, (data2, err2) => {
        if(err2) throw err2
        doMoreStuffToData(data2, (data3, err3) => {
            if (err3) throw err3
            doEvenMoreStuffToData(data3, err4) => {
                // and so on
            }
        })
    })
})
```

## Promises

Javascript Promises can be thought of as objects representing some future result. Promise objects have a `.then` and a `.catch` method that take a callback function as an argument. A prominent example is the [fetch API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Fetch_API) which _starts_ to fetch a resource and _immediately_ returns a promise **before** the resource is fetched. The promise at this point is _resolved_ but not _fulfilled_ (more on this later). When the status code and headers of the resource we're after return, the promise is fulfilled.

```js
fetch('https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/todos/1') // <= 1
  .then((response) => response.json()) // <= 2
  .then((parsed) => console.log(parsed)) // <= 3
```

**1)** fetch returns a Promise object. Using the Promise's `.then` method, we register a callback function. **2)** when the fetch Promise results (the data comes in), the callback function we passed to its `.then` method is invoked. Notice that when the fetch Promise results, the value that fulfills it (response) is passed to our callback function.

**2)** the fetch API Promise results in a response object that has a `.json` method. As the body of the response may not have returned at the same time as our status code and headers, the `.json` method also returns a Promise. We register another callback with this Promise **3)** that is invoked when the `.json` method successfully parses the response object's body. And like before, the result of this successful parsing of the response's body is passed as an argument to our callback function.

### Error Handling

A Promise's `.then` method actually has two parameters. The first is a callback function that is invoked if the Promise is fulfilled and the second, also a callback function, will be invoked if the Promise is rejected.

```js
function displayData(data) {
  console.log(data)
}

function handleError(err) {
  console.log(err.message)
}
function returnsAPromise() {
  return fetch('https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/todos/1').then(
    (response) => response.json()
  )
}

returnsAPromise().then(displayData, handleError)
```

From our _returnsAPromise_ function we, shocker, return a Promise (recall the `.json` method returns a Promise). On this Promise we register two callback functions, the first for the data, the second for potential errors. This, however, isn't commonly done; instead, we typically use a Promise's `.catch` method to register our error handling function.

```js
...
returnsAPromise().then(displayData).catch(handleError)
```

> note **.catch(handleError)** is equivalent to **.then(null, handleError)**

### But What Does it All _Really_ Mean?

There is some tricky terminology surrounding promises that needs some clarification, namely _resolved_, _fulfilled_, _settled_ and _rejected_. A Promise is said to be settled, if it's, put crudely, finished. If it has been fulfilled or rejected, it's settled. If it's fulfilled then whatever asynchronous work that needed to be done was completed successfully. Conversely, if a Promise is rejected, its work was not successfully completed. The most tricky concept is the concept of resolution. Immediately when a Promise object is created and returned, it is resolved. Resolved, however, doesn't mean finished, it means the fate of the Promise is tied to something else, an asynchronous task to be completed, or another promise.

So a Promise can be resolved, but not fulfilled. Let's return to our simple fetch example:

```js
fetch('https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/todos/1') // <= 1
  .then((response) => response.json()) // <= 2
  .then((parsed) => console.log(parsed)) // <= 3
```

**1)** fetch returns Promise 1, which is resolved, but not fulfilled, because the Promise object is created before the asynchronous task is complete. Promise 1 is resolved because its fate is tied to the asynchronous work that must be done, namely, fetching. Once our fetching is done, a value is returned, in this case a response object. This return value fulfills and becomes the value of Promise 1.

**2)** response is passed to our callback function. Recall the `.then` method returns a promise. So the `.then` method on line 2 returns a resolved Promise whose then method we pass our final callback to (line 3).

If a callback function registered to, or an ascynchronous task associated with, a Promise returns a non-Promise value, the Promise is immediately fulfilled and considered settled. If, however, a Promise is returned as the value, then the Promise recieving it is not fulfilled, but it is resolved in that its fate is tied to the Promise returned to it. Once the returned Promise's work returns a non-Promise value, it is fulfilled with that value and, consequently, the Promise it was returned to is also fulfilled with this value.

```js
let p1 = fetch('https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/todos/1') // <= 1
let p2 = p1.then((response) => response.json()) // <= 2
let p3 = p2.then((parsed) => console.log(parsed)) // <= 3
```

**1)** fetch returns a Promise to p1. On the next line, **2**, we return a promise to p2. This promise is resolved but not fulfilled as the callback on line 2 returns a promise we'll call p4. When response.json() finishes, p4 is fulfilled with the result; recall that p2 is resolved, tied to the fate of p4, and now that p4 is fulfilled p2 is fulfilled as well and the callback function registered on line 3 is invoked.

## Wrapping It Up

While promises aren't the hottest new kid on the block, see [async/await](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/JavaScript/Asynchronous/Async_await), I'd still like to have a thorough understanding of them since there are still a lot of Promise based APIs out there. I personally did, and kinda still do, find the concept a little tricky but I figured trying to write about it would help... I think I'll probably still go over it a few more times and maybe even update this article when I'm done.

If you like, or god forbid, didn't like this article, feel free to shoot me a [message](https://pharmdtechie.net/contact). I'm still learning so if I'm off base, even a little, any feedback is appreciated! Thanks for reading!.
